# Reasonable Concerns For Themes

Themes shouldn't handle logic - they should be reasonable defaults primarily set through theme.json api (as everything is intended to ultimately be editable here for styling).
Logic should be the domain of plugins. 

##Theme Roles

 - Color 
 - Typography
 - Spacing
 - Block Patterns
 - HTML Templates

Functionality that manipulates core code (for example, removing wp-container-{$id} auto generated classes), while in the style
realm should only be handled via plugin. This way, the theme itself can opt to use whatever WordPress core uses **and utilize** performance
and management properties via logic manipulation of a plugin, _while looking good in both contexts_.

In this way, by manipulating theme.json, the user can still set whatever style preferences they have, but the theme itself can maintain
design integrity when it comes to the _overall layout_ and _appearance_ of elements.

### Example

A plugin overrides wp-container-{$id} autogenerated classses (which pulls things like content width and vertical spacing), but
the plugin pulls the data to override in new css classes _from the theme's theme.json or user set data_. That way, the plugin offers
more specific optimized control, but the theme itself works perfectly fine with the intended spacing set via ```blockGap``` or ```layout```
in the theme.json file. 

In this context, the _plugin's_ opinions shouldn't be strong - they should only apply to structure, rather than a specific, major style alteration.

For instance, we wouldn't want to set a _non-variable_ value that isn't a WordPress core default to the plugin, because no the theme
would have to adapt to whatever opinions the plugin has. Rather, the plugin should focus on catering to the theme's opinions when it comes
to styles.

## Block Patterns

Block patterns shouldn't be overly complex in a theme. Meaning, they shouldn't inject overly specific designs. The theme block patterns should be more like
architectural skeletons: containers that handle the most common layout formats themselves (e.g. three column call to action, hero section, two column split).

### Good Theme Level Block Patterns

- Hero Section 
- 50/50 Content split
- Call To Actions

Generally, if you'd have an _entire content section_ of a site dedicated in a certain layout, then it's probably a good theme block pattern. If it's a specific context, like a contact form, then that's custom block plugin territory.

### Example
To make a column row appear more like instagram stories or reels (e.g. where they scroll horizontally on mobile), this should be a **custom block handled via plugin**, rather than
a theme pattern, because it introduces new logic that manipulates blocks individually and is a feature that isn't specific to **the style design** of a theme.

In this case, the custom block (or block style) should pull _stylistic opinions_ from the theme's settings to modify it's appearance, and focus only on the CSS / JS that makes the content
flow horizontally rather than stack vertically on mobile. 

## HTML Templates
Block Templates should generally be minimalistic - primarily composed of Block Patterns and common shared elements. The strength of Full Site Editing
is that a user can go into any given page and _without altering_ the template _or by creating a user custom template_ modify any given page to add specific
context to that page. 

Template files should be more _guidelines_ of the common elements shared between pages that share that style. Therefore, we should leverage that strength by being
generic in nature to imply how the overall _flow of a page_ should happen. Custom Templates could be used for more theme-specific needs that are injectable into a specific page.

This is to avoid the classic theme problem where you end up with an endless list of ```page-page-name.php``` type templates to handle specific situations.

### Good Block Template Pages

- single.html (single post page)
- page.html (single page)
- 404.html
- search.html
- archive.html
- blank.html (for specific cases, such as a landing page removing header, or linktree-like contact page, etc)

There likely doesn't need to be a specific home page template - since home pages are almost entirely unique and stand alone in many cases. Rather a home page
should use the ```page.html``` file as a base, and then incorporate custom design opinions specific to the home page.

### Good Additional Template Pages

- home.html or index.html

In the context of _showing the most recent blog_ posts, this is typically pretty algorithmic in layout - and different enough from other elements, yet important enough
that it should be separate from ```archive.html``` . Likely ```index.html``` is a very reasonable default here.

- author.html

Author pages are a bit different from the other archive types (category, tags, taxonomy, date) and in the cases where they make the most sense, this is a reasonable default to set.

- Considerations for linktree-esque contact pages, or team pages.

These likely should be handled more like blank or extended off of page.html since they are likely to be highly edited. A link-tree like
contact page **may be better** as a plugin that injects a template, since it's reasonable to think that a user would consistently want to edit
that particular page, free from the clutter of going through pages to find it.
